By means of an angel, Jehovah God told his dear friend Abraham that he was going to destroy
the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah.
The angel said, the outcry against Sodom and Gomorrah is indeed great, and their sin is
very heavy.
Abraham was troubled.
He apparently wondered whether Jehovah had taken all of the factors into consideration
before he made that decision to destroy the cities.
So he asked, will the judge of all the earth not do what is right?
Well we can understand why Abraham would ask that question.
It was early days in his relationship with Jehovah God.
He was just beginning to get acquainted with Jehovah, and we can hardly imagine him
asking the same question later when he knew Jehovah much better.
But have you ever asked a similar question?
Maybe when you were just coming into the truth?
Have you ever asked, for example, will none of those who died in the flood get a resurrection,
even those who may never have heard of Noah?
And what about Sodom and Gomorrah?
Will everyone who died in Sodom and Gomorrah sleep and everlasting sleep the women, the
children, babies?
And was there not one redeemable Assyrian soldier in that band of 185,000 who died at the
hand of Jehovah's angel?
We don't have the answer to those questions, but we do know one thing.
The merciful judge of all the earth will do what is right.
Wait a minute, did I hear that right?
We don't have the answer to those questions.
I thought we did.
In the past, our publications have stated that there's no hope of a resurrection for
those who died in the flood or those destroyed in Sodom and Gomorrah.
But do we really know that?
The band of Sodom and Gomorrah were certainly wicked, and they deserved to die for what
they did.
But did they know any better?
How often did Lot and his family preach to them?
And are we saying that if special pioneers had been assigned to Sodom, that they would
have had no success whatsoever in preaching to the Sodomites, helping them to turn around
and come to an knowledge of Jehovah?
Can we say dogmatically that not one Sodomite would have repented if Jehovah's requirements
have been explained?
And then there's the fascinating statement made by Jesus, found at Matthew chapter 11.
I'll give you a moment, Matthew chapter 11, and we're going to read verses 23 and 24.
This is interesting.
Matthew 11, 23 and 24.
And you, Capernaum, would you perhaps be exalted to heaven down to the grave, if you will
come?
Because, and notice this, if the powerful works that took place in you had taken place
in Sodom, it would have remained until this very day.
But I say to you, it will be more and durable for the land of Sodom on judgment day than
for you.
It would have remained until this very day.
Jehovah's angel had told Abraham that if ten righteous men could be found in Sodom,
the city would not be destroyed.
So was Jesus saying that if he had preached and performed powerful works in Sodom, ten
righteous men would have been found and the city would have been spared?
It's also of interest to consider Jehovah's words to unfaithful Judah in Ezekiel
16.
Jehovah said that the citizens of Sodom were more righteous than the inhabitants of Judah.
So if Sodom is doomed, what about Judah?
But what about the disciple Jude's statement that Sodom and Gomorrah would undergo the judicial
punishment of everlasting fire?
Well, that's certainly, we'll prove through of the cities, and probably many of the inhabitants
as well.
But does it mean that there's no hope for any of them?
Jesus' statement, we just read, would indicate that there is hope for some.
We just can't be dogmatic.
But again, we can say that the merciful judge of all the earth will do what is right.
Now let's talk about the flood of Noah's day.
In the past, we've said that any who died in the flood would not be resurrected.
But does the Bible say that?
Now Noah's contemporaries certainly were wicked.
At the Bible says that man's wickedness was great on the earth, and every inclination
of the thoughts of his heart was only bad all the time.
So those living at that time were sinners.
But did they all get a thorough witness?
Oh, and his family must have been very busy building the ark.
How much time did they have for preaching?
And were they able to do seldom worked territory?
We have found that people who live within ten miles of Bethel have never heard of Jehovah's
Witnesses.
So can we guarantee that everyone living on earth during that time knew of Noah and what
he was doing?
We can't really say that.
And can we say that if someone had been given an adequate opportunity, he still would
have turned his back on Jehovah?
We just can't say that.
Now, of course, if Jehovah didn't bring them back, they wouldn't have any grounds for
complaint.
They've had life.
And life is more than any of us deserves.
As you know, when Adam and Eve sinned, Jehovah could have destroyed them right away.
And instead, he gave them the opportunity to have sons and daughters, and as a result,
we were born.
So the fact that you and I have drawn one breath is pure undeserved kindness on Jehovah's
part.
Now, on the other hand, for many years, it was suggested that all those who the Bible says
were buried with their forefathers were going to have a resurrection.
A Solomon was one of those.
The Bible says of him, then Solomon was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried
in the city of David, his father.
Well, we reasoned that those who were buried with their forefathers were in the common
grave of mankind.
And we know that the common grave of mankind is going to be emptied during the thousand
year reign of Christ.
But we ask ourselves, when Bible writers said that someone was buried with his forefathers,
were they really revealing what Jehovah's final judgment would be?
Was Jehovah revealing to them, inspiring them to say how he was going to settle the case?
Or the Bible writers really saying that this is the way the person was buried.
This is the manner of his burial.
Remember, in Bible times, the way someone was buried was very important.
Joseph and Jacob refused to be buried in Egypt.
High priest, Jehovah, was buried with the kings of Judah because of all the good things
he had done.
And when a prophet said that a certain king was going to have the burial of a donkey, that
wasn't good.
Solomon was the second wisest man ever to walk the earth.
Jehovah appeared to him twice.
And the second time he appeared to him, he said, if you and your sons turn away from
following me and go and serve other gods and bow down to them, I will cut Israel off
from the surface of the land.
What did Solomon do?
He began to serve other gods and bow down to them.
How will the judge of all the earth view that?
That's not for us to say.
So we can't be dogmatic about the prospects of those who are said to be buried with their
forefathers.
It could be that the Bible was just indicating the manner of their burial.
Now that isn't to say that they won't be resurrected.
It simply means that we don't know.
The righteous judge knows.
And we know that he'll do the right thing.
All what do we know about Jehovah?
Why can we trust him to do the right thing?
Well, look at the record.
In the days of the Prophet Joel, God's people were in a sick spiritual condition.
They were worshipping the bails and the golden calves and sacred poles.
They were lying, committing adultery, stealing, shedding innocent blood, oppressing widows
and orphans.
Jehovah had good reason to wipe the whole nation out.
And yet what do we read at Joel 213?
Joel says, rip apart your hearts and not your garments and return to Jehovah your God
for he is compassionate and merciful, slow to anger and abundant in royal love.
And he will reconsider the calamity.
He will reconsider the calamity after all that Jehovah was willing to show mercy.
Now this is very encouraging.
Why?
Many of our brothers have no trouble accepting the fact that Jehovah will forgive the sins
they committed in their ignorance before they came to a knowledge of the truth.
But if they've committed to sin after baptism, they're afraid that Jehovah will never
forget and he will never forgive them.
And yet what do we see here?
The nation of Israel was in a dedicated situation before Jehovah.
And yet Jehovah said, if you stop doing what is wrong, if you start doing what is right,
I will reconsider.
Then you have the encouraging words found at Ezekiel 33.
Let's read this.
And I find that this is a good passage to read to brothers and sisters who may feel that
Jehovah could never forgive them for what they've done.
Ezekiel 33, verses 14 and 16, verse 14 first.
And when I say to the wicked one, you will surely die.
And he turns away from his sin and does what is just and righteous, verse 16, none of the
sins he committed will be held against him for doing what is just and right.
Righteous, he will surely keep living.
Now, isn't that encouraging for someone who strayed from the truth?
Maybe God involved in some bad conduct and far too many of these are afraid that Jehovah
will never forgive them.
They would love to come back to the truth.
They would love to come back to Jehovah, but they're afraid that Jehovah is not going
to accept them.
And yet he says none of the sins he committed will be held against him.
The case of King Manasseh makes the point.
He was in a dedicated relationship with Jehovah, and yet for most of his life he did what
was wrong.
But when he repented, turned around and started doing what was right, Jehovah wiped the
slate clean.
What a marvelous, merciful God, we worship.
He shows that Jehovah was so mercy whenever he sees a basis for doing so.
Now, consider how Jehovah dealt with the people of Nineveh in the days of Jonah.
Their conduct was so bad that Jehovah was determined to destroy the city, and Jonah was in agreement
with that.
Yeah, wipe them all out.
But Jehovah was more merciful than Jonah was.
And when he saw that the people repented and turned around, he was willing to forgive
them.
Why?
The Bible tells us why.
They didn't know right from wrong.
They didn't know any better.
While some of those Ninevehites be back, Jesus' words found at Matthew 12-41 seemed to indicate
that they will, he said, men of Nineveh will rise up in the judgment with this generation
and will condemn it because they repented at what Jonah preached.
But look, something more than Jonah is here.
So what do we see from these examples?
The men of Nineveh, Manassa, and others.
They were wicked.
They did bad things.
They repented.
They started to do what was right, and Jehovah wiped the slate clean.
Well today, power for judging has been given to someone else.
There's a different judge of all the earth.
And we read about him at John chapter 5, John chapter 5, and we're going to read verse
22.
I'll give you a moment.
John 5 and 22.
For the Father judges no one at all, but He has entrusted all the judging, all the
judging to the Son.
Jesus has been given authority to judge the living and the dead.
Well, can we trust Him?
Can we be sure that Jesus will be merciful?
Absolutely.
He's the exact image of His Father.
And the prophet Isaiah wrote of him, he will not judge by what appears to his eyes, nor
reproof simply according to what His ears hear.
He will judge the lowly with fairness, and with uprightness, He will give reproof in
behalf of the weak ones of the earth.
The authority that Jesus has been given includes the authority to resurrect the dead.
He's the resurrection and the life.
Now, you know, we often say that Jehovah God knows everything about those who have died,
and that's true.
But since Jesus is doing the resurrecting, it's reasonable to conclude that He also knows
everything about the dead and the living, and He's going to be able to resurrect them
accurately.
Now, whether He'll share the power to resurrect with His anointed brothers when they're raised
to heaven, remains to be seen.
We'll stay tuned.
Well, what's the takeaway from this talk so far?
How would you explain it to someone who wasn't here today?
You would not say, someone who died in Sodom of Gomorrah and in the flood are going to
be resurrected, and Solomon isn't going to be resurrected.
No, no, no, you wouldn't say that.
What we're saying is that we shouldn't be dogmatic about who will and who will not be
resurrected.
We just don't know.
But we trust Jehovah God.
We trust Jesus Christ that they will do what is right.